DSS Update Methods – Manual vs API Execution
This document compares the manual and API-based execution of DSS (Dynamic System Settings) updates in Pega, along with a flowchart to visualize the process and recommendations for secure access.
### Flowchart: DSS Update Process
 
Manual vs API-Based Execution – Comparison
Aspect	Manual Execution	API Execution (updateConfig)
Time Efficiency	Slow – login and update each env manually	Fast – supports bulk updates
Error-Prone	High – risk of human error	Low – automation minimizes mistakes
Auditability	Poor – hard to trace	Good – logs via service account
Security	Needs individual access per user	Centralized with admin/service account
Scalability	Poor	High – scriptable
Rollback	Manual	Possible with versioned payload
Consistency	Risk of mismatch	Consistent across environments
Access Strategy Recommendation
It is recommended to create a dedicated Service Account for invoking the DSS update API instead of granting administrator privileges to individual users.
Steps:
•	- Create operator like `svc_ConfigUpdater`
•	- Assign necessary access for DSS update scope only
•	- Restrict UI login
•	- Use API with secure authentication
•	- Log and monitor API usage
 
Service Account Traceability & Audit Strategy
To address concerns around accountability when using a service account for DSS updates via API, the following strategies can be adopted to ensure traceability and audit readiness:
1. Token-Based Execution with Metadata
Capture the user or system that triggers the API call (e.g., Jenkins user, scheduled job) and include this information in the payload or headers of the request. This ensures indirect attribution.
2. Custom Audit Logging
Implement structured logs for every update. The log entry should contain:
- DSS Name
- Updated Value
- Timestamp
- Triggered By (User or CI Job ID)
- Payload ID (if applicable)
3. Role-Based Workflow with Approvals
Automate DSS updates behind a controlled approval gate. For instance:
  Request → Approval → API Execution.
The approving user's name and timestamp are logged for audit.
4. Integration with Centralized Logging
Send update logs to external monitoring systems (e.g., Splunk, ELK, CloudWatch) for retention, searchability, and alerts in case of unauthorized changes.
Sample Log Format
Timestamp: 2025-06-19T14:52:00Z
Environment: Pega-Dev
DSS Name: pxProcessExt/MaxRequestorThreshold
Old Value: 200
New Value: 300
Triggered By: jenkins_user123
Execution Account: svc_ConfigUpdater
Payload ID: DSSChange-JOB-20250619-001
Jenkins Job Logging Tip
Use environment variables to dynamically log who triggered the job. For example, in a Jenkins pipeline:

`echo "Triggered By: ${BUILD_USER_ID}" >> dss_update.log`
